Now here in another Dart deep dive,
I wanna explore another key value
that we have in Dart
and therefore, also in Flutter,
and a relatively new concept
that was added to Dart and Flutter.
And that would be the value null
or the value type null,
and a concept called Null Safety.
Now, let's understand what a null value is.
It's a special kind of built-in value,
and it can be very useful
if you, for example, wanna reset a value.
Let's say you have a variable userName
and that initially has a value of Max.
Now, you get that from some user input anywhere
in your app,
and at some point in your app,
you wanna clear this.
You wanna reset it.
Now, what you could then do in such a case
is you could set it back to an empty string.
Another value you could use to express your intention
that you don't want to have a value right now though
would be the special null value.
Now, if you use null here, I'm getting an error
because I got Null Safety turned on here in DartPad.
And in Flutter apps, you also might have this turned on.
Now, I'll come back to Null Safety in a second.
For the moment, we can turn it off here in DartPad
by clicking on this toggle at the bottom.
Now I'm assigning this special null value to userName,
and with that, I'm saying hey,
userName, at this point here,
shouldn't have a value anymore
because I don't need this name anymore
because it was entered in a form,
which now was reset, something like that.
We'll see use cases where we might want
to store a null value throughout this course.
And therefore, null is a special kind of value.
It simply expresses
that we don't want to have a value at a certain point.
We could assign it here to reset some value.
Alternatively, if I comment this out,
we could also have a scenario
where we don't have a value initially
where initially, userName doesn't contain a value,
and therefore, initially this actually is null,
and then only at a certain point,
we assign a value to it.
This would be the other way around.
Now it's initially an empty value
but at some point, we assign a value.
By the way, this approach is also allowed
if you enable Null Safety.
But again, I'll come back to that in a second.
Let's turn it off for now.
So, null is a value that you could have initially
if you haven't assigned a value yet,
or which you assign explicitly at some point
to reset or clear a variable
or a property you might be working with.
Now, this null value can especially be useful
if you have Boolean comparisons,
if you have a if check, for example.
And you only wanna proceed
if userName does have a value.
You could, for example, check if userName
is not equal to null,
and only continue if it's not null.
That is some code which you could write,
and then you would only proceed if you have a value,
and if, on the other hand, you deliberately set it to null,
you would avoid executing such code.
Again, I'm aware that this is pure theory here
but we'll see use cases like this
and we'll see the null value throughout this course.
But with that, let's dive into another key topic,
the topic of Null Safety.
The idea behind Null Safety
is a relatively new one in Dart,
and therefore also in Flutter,
and in the end, it's all about avoiding bugs
that you might have in your application,
so errors that you might have in your application,
because you might be trying to work with a value
in some place of your code where it might be null.
If you use if checks like this
where you explicitly check if something is null or not,
you can avoid such errors
because then you always know that inside of this if check,
username won't be null because you're checking for it here.
But you also might have other scenarios
where you don't have such a if check,
and where instead, you continue working
with a certain value
as you as a developer might know
that at the point you're using it,
it shouldn't be null
but maybe you have some scenario
in your code where it could be null,
and then your application could crash at runtime.
And the idea behind Null Safety simply is
that Dart runs extra checks on your code
behind the scenes to catch such scenarios.
And let me show you a little bit
of a more concrete example here.
Up to this point in the course,
we worked on outputting questions
and answers for these questions.
And if you did set up your project
with these starting files I provided to you,
that should work for you just fine.
It's especially important
that in your pubspec.yaml file,
you have your environment set to sdk greater 2.11.0.
If you have a different setting here,
for example, greater than 2.12.0,
if I change my setting to that,
then you would actually be getting errors
in the code we wrote thus far.
You would be getting an error
in answer.dart if you're using function here
instead of VoidCallback
but that's not related to this null thing here.
That's only Flutter complaining
that there is a more specific description of the kind
of function that we expect for selectHandler available,
that we want a function that doesn't return a value,
a so-called VoidCallback.
But you would also have an error in main.dart
where we actually get the complaint
that the argument of type Object?
can't be assigned to the parameter type String.
And that's Null Safety in action here.
Null Safety in Flutter projects is enabled
by setting this environment in the pubspec.yaml file
to a value greater or equal to 2.12.
And that's why I set it to 2.11
because this disables Null Safety,
and that's not a problem here
because the code I show you will work.
It doesn't crash, it will work just fine.
But with enabled Null Safety,
Dart runs some extra checks,
which in this case complain about a problem
that doesn't exist.
It might still be an idea
to get rid of that problem in the first place
but I wanna emphasize that it's not an actual problem
in our code here.
And since I recorded the course before the release
of this Null Safety feature,
throughout this course,
you'll have various situations
where those Null Safety checks would complain
about issues that aren't really issues
and that won't lead to problems in the app.
Here the problem it's complaining about
is that questionText, the questionText I'm extracting here,
could theoretically be null
because Dart doesn't understand our code here good enough
to see that it actually can't ever be null
because the way we configure all those questions,
every questionText has a non-null string value.
But Dart doesn't understand our code good enough to see that
and therefore, this question mark here after Object
in this error message signals
that Dart thinks that this could be an object value,
so any kind of value,
but it could also be null.
And a null value would cause an error here,
even though we as a developer, of course,
know that in this case here,
questionText can't ever be null
because the way we set up our questions ensures
that there is no question
where the questionText would hold a null value.
But that's exactly the problem you can get with Null Safety.
You get extra errors in cases
where your code is absolutely fine.
And that is why for this course,
I recommend that you turn off Null Safety
because I recorded the course
before this feature was released.
Hence I didn't have those extra warnings,
and hence, there are code snippets
that would cause these errors,
even though the code I show you is absolutely fine.
Alternatively, you can also try to improve the code
to convince Dart that this won't ever be null
by adding an exclamation mark
after a statement where Dart thinks
that it could be null.
Then here the only remaining problem is that Dart sees
that this is any object, so any value,
not necessarily a string,
and it's also not too happy about that.
And therefore, you can fix this issue as well
by instead writing as String here
just as one line below that,
we're writing as List String.
There we do that to convince Dart
that this will be a list of strings.
Now I'm doing this to convince Dart
that this will be a string.
And then I automatically, with that as String,
tell Dart that it will always be a string,
never null or anything like that.
So with that, we then also fix this potential null issue
in the same step because I tell Dart
that I as a developer know that this will never be null.
So that's how we could fix this
but again, as mentioned before,
my recommendation to follow along smoothly
with exactly the same code you see in the videos
is that you set your environment SDK version
to greater or equal 2.11
instead of a higher value,
because that will then disable
these extra Null Safety checks
and the code you write is the same,
the code works just fine.
You just don't have these wrong error messages.
Now, to conclude this lecture
about null and Null Safety,
I wanna come back to the example from the beginning,
here in DartPad.
You might remember that here,
if Null Safety was turned on,
if I did set my string to null here,
I got an error here.
I got an error because now it is a string
and Dart infers that this variable should hold a string
because we initialize it with a string,
but I then set it to null.
And null is not a string.
It's a separate type, the type null.
If we wanna allow that we set this to null,
so if we wanna tell Dart that userName
is either a string or a null,
then we have to change the way we introduce this variable.
Instead of writing it like this,
we can write it like this
with this question mark after the type name.
With that, we're telling Dart
that this should generally be a string,
so we still wouldn't be allowed
to store numbers or anything like that.
But with the question mark, which is optional,
we tell Dart that this might also hold a null value.
So without the question mark,
we still get the error we got before.
With the question mark, we tell Dart it's okay,
this should be a string
but if it's null, that's also okay.
So if you have Null Safety enabled,
then you can use this question mark
when introducing variables or function parameters
or object properties
to tell Dart that this variable, parameter
or property may have its main value type
but may also be null.
And that's it for the null value
and Null Safety at the moment.
We will see now throughout this course
in various examples,
and as I mentioned, Null Safety is not covered in depth here
because the course was recorded
before that feature was released
but the code we write won't have any problems with null.
So we also don't need it for this course.